---
layout: default
title: Copyright Information
---

Copyright notices governing the use of publications from this site.

[ACM](http://www.acm.org/publications/policies/copyright_policy/)
---
Copyright by the Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. Permission to make
digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use
is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for
profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full
citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by
others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
Publications Dept, ACM Inc., fax +1 (212) 869-0481, or permissions@acm.org.

[Elsevier](http://www.elsevier.com/)
--------
The following copyright notice applies to all papers published by Elsevier, as
mentioned in the Copyright Information. The author retains the right to post
a revised personal version of the text of the final journal article (to reflect
changes made in the peer review and editing process) on the author's personal or
institutional web site or server, with a link to the journal home page (on
elsevier.com).

[IBFI](http://drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/doku/urheberrecht.html)
----
The copyright applies unrestrictedly to any documents that are made available
electronically via the data network. Single duplications, e.g. copies and
printouts, are only permitted for private and any other own use (paragraph 53,
german "Urheberrecht", September 2003). The production and contribution of any
further reproduction is only allowed with the explicit permission of the
originator. The user is fully responsible for the compliance with the statutory
provisions and may be made liable for any misuse.

[IEEE](http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/copyrightpolicy.html)
----
This material is presented to ensure timely dissemination of scholarly and
technical work. Copyright and all rights therein are retained by authors or by
other copyright holders. All persons copying this information are expected to
adhere to the terms and constraints invoked by each author's copyright. In most
cases, these works may not be reposted without the explicit permission of the
copyright holder.

